DBMS-QUIZ 2 
============

Quiz-2 is to be conducted on the 23rd January at 4:30pm in SH2. 
The questions are predecided and are the ones given below. You need to solve
the same two questions in class during the quiz slot. You can carry your
text books. Negative marks will be awarded if you are not present for the
quiz.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------


1)  Consider the following information about a university database:

  - Professors have an SSN, a name, an age, a rank, and a research
  specialty.
  - Projects have a project number, a sponsor name (e.g., NSF), a starting
  date, an ending date, and a budget.
  - Graduate students have an SSN, a name, an age, and a degree program
  (e.g., M.S. or Ph.D.).
  - Each project is managed by one professor (known as the project's
  principal investigator).
  - Each project is worked on by one or more professors (known as the
  project's co-investigators).
  - Professors can manage and/or work on multiple projects.
  - Each project is worked on by one or more graduate students (known as
  the project's research assistants).
  - When graduate students work on a project, a professor must supervise
  their work on the project. Graduate students can work on multiple
projects,
  in which case they will have a (potentially different) supervisor for each
  one.
  - Departments have a department number, a department name, and a main
  office.
  - Departments have a professor (known as the chairman) who runs the
  department.
  - Professors work in one or more departments, and for each department
  that they work in, a time percentage is associated with their job.
  - Graduate students have one major department in which they are working
  on their degree.
  - Each graduate student has another, more senior graduate student (known
  as a student advisor) who advises him or her on what courses to take.

    Design and draw an ER diagram that captures the information about the
university. Use only the basic ER model here, that is, entities, relationships, and
attributes. Be sure to indicate any key and participation constraints.


2) Answer each of the following questions briefly. The questions are based
on the following relational schema:

Emp(eid: integer, ename: string, age: integer, salary: real)
Works(eid: integer, did: integer, pct time: integer)
Dept(did: integer, dname: string, budget: real, managerid: integer)

1. Give an example of a foreign key constraint that involves the Dept
relation. What are the options for enforcing this constraint when a user attempts to delete a
Dept tuple?
2. Write the SQL statements required to create the above relations,
including appropriate versions of all primary and foreign key integrity
constraints.
3. De ne the Dept relation in SQL so that every department is guaranteed to
have a manager.
4. Write an SQL statement to add `John Doe' as an employee with eid = 101,
age = 32 and salary = 15000.
5. Write an SQL statement to give every employee a 10% raise.
6. Write an SQL statement to delete the `Toy' department. Given the
referential integrity constraints you chose for this schema, explain what
happens when this statement is executed.

